ID: 22
Title: LGBT+ Toolkit
URL: https://www.rsc.org/policy-and-campaigning/science-culture/resources-and-toolkits/lgbt-toolkit
Detected type: html
Extraction method: trafilatura
Text length: 3108
----------------------------------------

LGBT+ toolkit This kit provides the tools for everyone to take part in positive change. Taking concrete steps towards greater LGBT+ inclusivity is a key part of fostering diverse and welcoming scientific workplaces. Last year in the Exploring the Workplace for LGBT+ Physical Scientists report, we found that although the workplace climate is generally improving, more action is needed to build genuine LGBT+ inclusivity in the physical sciences. Differences in experience are particularly stark for some in the community, such as trans and non-binary scientists. From this data and further research, we've created a set of resources that tackle the key issues faced by LGBT+ physical scientists. This kit provides the tools for everyone to take part in positive change: employers, colleagues, and LGBT+ individuals. Follow the workflow below to find the resource you need for guidance and support in making a real difference towards LGBT+ inclusivity in science. Posters A set of posters to be displayed in scientific workplaces in order to promote messages of LGBT+ inclusivity, create visibly welcoming workplaces, and signpost towards the RSC LGBT+ toolkit. Use the following versions to display your own departmental contact. Download posters with contact boxes Booklets LGBT+ scientists A booklet for LGBT+ scientists, covering areas such as knowing your rights and practising self-care, as well as a collection of links to useful resources. Download booklet: Empowering You as an LGBT+ Scientist Allyship A resource for anyone looking to learn more about acting in allyship and solidarity with LGBT+ colleagues, covering areas such as positive accountability and bystander intervention. Download booklet: Practising Active LGBT+ Allyship Employers A practical guide for employers and managers on embedding LGBT+ inclusivity into workplace policy and practice, including implementing innovative reporting and feedback systems. Download booklet: Embedding LGBT+ Inclusivity in Scientific Workplaces Trans inclusivity A resource focusing on trans inclusivity, covering areas such as knowing your rights as a trans scientist, as well as guidance for colleagues on effective allyship and for employers on fostering trans-inclusive workplaces. Download booklet: Building Trans-Inclusive Scientific Workplaces Leaflets Teachers A leaflet addressing the particular work environment experienced by LGBT+ teachers, with guidance for their employers as well as support and resources for teachers themselves. Download leaflet: Supporting LGBT+ Teachers International mobility Guidance for employers and LGBT+ scientists on international mobility, including a list of points to consider when writing risk assessments and determining international operations. Download leaflet: Considering International Mobility for LGBT+ Scientists Glossary A list of terms used throughout the RSC LGBT+ toolkit, with definitions and notes on good practice in general usage. RSC pronoun stickers An introduction and quick practical guide to using RSC pronoun stickers, making events more inclusive for trans and non-binary people.