ID: 23
Title: Exploring The Workplace For LGBT+ Physical Scientists
URL: https://www.rsc.org/policy-and-campaigning/science-culture/the-workplace-for-lgbt-physical-scientists
Detected type: html
Extraction method: trafilatura
Text length: 2626
----------------------------------------

The workplace for LGBT+ physical scientists A report by the Institute of Physics, Royal Astronomical Society and the Royal Society of Chemistry Despite progress, many LGBT+ physical scientists have experienced or observed exclusionary behaviour in the workplace. Many LGBT+ people do not find the physical sciences to be a comfortable working environment – and have thought about leaving. Our report In partnership with the Institute of Physics and the Royal Astronomical Society, we have conducted a comprehensive survey to gather data from across the community – giving us new insights into the current workplace environment for LGBT+ physical scientist. The majority of LGBT+ scientists think the working environment is improving. But we need to do more, with many reporting a lack of awareness of LGBT+ issues in their workplace. What feels like a hostile environment to one person is not always obvious to those around them. Feelings of discomfort are not necessarily the result of overt negativity, some of the actions that cause them might be almost imperceptible, or easily ignored. Common signifiers of an exclusionary environment include: - Workplace policies and procedures that don’t adequately support employees that are not heterosexual and cisgender. - The incorrect use of pronouns to address or refer to LBGT+ employees. - Casual insensitive humour, even when not maliciously intended. Ultimately, what any minority group-belonging person wants is, when push comes to shove, will my organisation support me? Interview participant, cisgender man, gay Doing the best for science means retaining LGBT+ scientists. No one is definable by a single characteristic – we are all complex individuals subject to a whole host of different influences. But, to create an environment where the best scientists can flourish and the best science can be done, we need to make sure everyone feels comfortable. If we can do that it won’t just benefit our LGBT+ colleagues, but everyone in our workplaces. Let’s act now to effect real change: - Build a visibly welcoming community - Review policies to ensure they are inclusive - Introduce and improve training at all levels If you would like to share your thoughts on this report or tell us about your own experiences, send us an email. Help us raise awareness We've prepared a range of ready-made digital items to download and use. We look forward to you contributing to the discussion. A summary of the key report findings and our calls for action. Contact our inclusion team We're here to help. Get in touch if you have any questions about inclusion in the chemical sciences.