ID: 48
Title: Association For Black and Ethnic Minority Engineers
URL: https://afbe.org.uk/
Detected type: html
Extraction method: trafilatura
Text length: 1803
----------------------------------------

Association for Black & Minority Ethnic Engineers Join UsAssociation for Black & Minority Ethnic Engineers Join UsDiscover what we can do for you! How did AFBE support us? "We've formalized our partnership with the Association For Black and Minority Ethnic Engineers-UK (AFBE-UK) to enhance Equity, Diversity, and Inclusion (EDI) in engineering and technology. AFBE-UK will guide our EDI strategy, recruitment, and leadership development. This collaboration aims for better representation and support in the engineering community." Laura Norton-IET How did AFBE support us? "AFBE has provided me with valuable insights, knowledge, and skills through their workshops and conferences. They have also introduced me to a supportive community of like-minded individuals." Elijah, 17 How did AFBE support us? "Engineers are the midwives of sustainability. None of the UNs SDGs can be achieved without us. It is therefore necessary that participation in Engineer is widened to as broad a group of people as possible." Dr Ollie Folayan MBE How did AFBE support us? " We believe inclusion is the bedrock for creativity and innovation. We promote initiatives that nuture excellence for a sustainable engineering future." Dr Nike Folayan MBE Did you know? Since inception, AFBE has had over 20,000 beneficiaries join the organisation 20,000 Did you know? Over 80 organisations work with us 80 Did you know? 300 AFBE mentors work with young professionals yearly to achieve their professional goals 300 Did you know? AFBE organizes over 100 events a year reaching an average of 5,000 attendees on engineering, education, diversity and belonging 5,000 Did you know? 41% of AFBE members are female. 41% Jobs? View the latest STEM job vacancies from employers with a positive approach to recruiting a diverse workforce.