ID: 65
Title: Social Inclusion Projects
URL: https://warwick.ac.uk/services/socialinclusion/projects/
Detected type: html
Extraction method: trafilatura
Text length: 2421
----------------------------------------

Projects Social Inclusion Projects We are working as a force for change on social inclusion at Warwick, regionally, nationally, and internationally. The Social Inclusion team leads Warwick’s institutional approach to creating a more diverse and inclusive community. We know this is a long term and challenging programme of work. But, we have made significant progress on our journey toward greater inclusion. We’re removing barriers, changing the ways things are done, nurturing diverse talent, and building belonging. We go beyond the bounds of legislative practice and regulatory requirements to provide an inclusive experience of outstanding academic and professional growth at the University for our students and staff. Explore social inclusion work at Warwick below, aligned to our strategic objectives for 2030... Diversity We aim to increase the diversity of our staff and student populations. Culture We aim to develop a culture that supports our people to achieve their potential. - Our Dignity Principles. - Equality Impact Assessments. - Adjustments. - Inclusion Learning. - Religion And Belief Guidance. - Warwick Inclusion Conference. - Inclusive Behaviour Frameworks. - Safe Travel Guidance. - LGBTQUIA+ Inclusion Resources. - Inclusive Education Model. - Estates Inclusive Environment Statement of Principles. - Social Inclusion Governance and Engagement Framework News - Inclusive Practice: A universal design approach to the provision of sanitary bins in toilets (January 2026). - Access, Belonging, and Opportunity: Supporting Sanctuary Students at Warwick (September 2025). - The 2025 Social Inclusion Staff Award winners are... We Are Chemistry, the Academic and Professional Pathway for Postgraduate Researchers who Teach programme, Dr Anil Awesti, Professor Rebecca Freeman, and Christine Ennew OBE(June 2025). - Our new and improved adjustments process! (January 2025). - Athena Swan Charter: University renews its Silver Award for gender equality (February 2024). Read the Social Inclusion Annual Report for more about the action we're taking. The Social Inclusion Annual Report highlights the work that has been taking place across the University over the last year, and how it is helping us to meet our Social Inclusion Strategy objectives to increase the diversity of our staff and student communities, develop an inclusive culture, and become an internationally recognised leader in inclusion.