ID: 80
Title: Research Fellowships
URL: https://www.raeng.org.uk/programmes-and-prizes/programmes/uk-grants-and-prizes/support-for-research/research-fellowships
Detected type: html
Extraction method: trafilatura
Text length: 3463
----------------------------------------

About our Research Fellowships The Royal Academy of Engineering offers Research Fellowships each year to outstanding early-career researchers to support them to become future research leaders in engineering. The scheme's objectives are to: - support the best early-career researchers in establishing their independence and international reputation - provide long-term support enabling the pursuit of an ambitious programme of engineering research and impact - develop ambassadors for the Academy and advocates for STEM (science, technology, engineering and mathematics) disciplines Applications guidance The Academy welcomes applications from early-career researchers worldwide who have been awarded their PhD in the last four years. The scheme is funded by the Department for Science, Innovation and Technology (DSIT) and provides funding for five years. Additionally, the UK based medical charity, Rosetrees, has co-funded two awardees from our previous cohorts. Each application is capped at a maximum contribution from the Academy of £625,000 over the five-year period, at 80% of full economic costs. Research Fellowships must be held at a UK higher education institution/university or at a UK research organisation eligible to receive UK Research and Innovation (UKRI) funding. Unlike previous rounds, the 2025/26 round would only include the Research Fellowship scheme and the Engineering for Development Research Fellowship (EDRF) scheme has been removed. However, we will continue to accept applications under the EDRF umbrella in the current round and they would be treated no differently to Research Fellowship applications. Research Fellowship benefits In addition to the direct financial support, the scheme benefits include: - Mentoring support from an Academy Fellow to offer advice on research and career development. - Reduction of teaching and administrative duties to dedicate time to research. - Training and additional funding opportunities. - Networking opportunities with other Research Fellows and Academy Fellows. - An opportunity to establish a strong research track record which will improve the chances of securing additional funding and expanding their own research teams. - Be part of the RAEng Awardee Excellence Community. Please refer to the guidance notes on the How to apply page for full details. Equity, Diversity and Inclusion The Royal Academy of Engineering is committed to equity, diversity and inclusion, welcoming applications from all underrepresented groups across engineering. It is the Academy's policy to ensure that no applicant is disadvantaged or receives less favourable treatment because of age, disability, gender reassignment, marriage and civil partnership, pregnancy and maternity, race, religion or belief, sex or sexual orientation. For all queries, please contact the Academy's research programmes team at [email protected] Awardee Excellence Community Connecting talent, passion and expertise to drive excellence in engineering and change the world for the better. Academy Café events Our online Academy CAFÉ (Connecting Awardees, Fostering Engagement) series provides engagement for awardees and alumni. Related resources Support for research The Academy runs a number of grants to support excellent researchers carry out engineering activities and to enable clo… Global Talent Visa The Global Talent visa is a UK immigration category for talented and promising individuals in specific sectors wishing…