ID: 83
Title: Future Leaders Fellows Development Network - Mentorship Programme
URL: https://www.flfdevnet.com/mentoring/
Detected type: html
Extraction method: trafilatura
Text length: 3571
----------------------------------------

Mentoring In October 2021, we launched our flagship Leadership Mentoring Programme. This bespoke mentoring offer provides maximum choice and flexibility to the Fellows in our Network and is based on insights into experience and development priorities we collected from them earlier in 2021. In this tailored mentoring programme, we hand-match Fellows with a sector leader for six months of focused development time. Our Leadership Mentors are experienced professionals from within and outside academia. In 2022, our programme was recognised by the EMCC, winning a Global Coaching, Mentoring, Supervision, and Team Coaching Award for Mentoring. Learn more by clicking here. Why mentoring? Mentoring can offer valuable learning opportunities at all stages of your career. A targeted mentoring conversation can help you clarify your thoughts, whether salient issues for you are: - resolving snags during your transition to a new role or responsibility - seeking your next career move - picking up a new skillset - finding support for navigating processes or relationships at work. Join the next cycle of our Leadership Mentoring Programme… Mentoring suite of options Mentoring conversations don’t need to be limited to our formal mentoring programme and can take place with a range of supporting players, in a range of different ways. As the Leadership Mentoring Programme progresses, we will add even more opportunities for you to talk about the things that matter to you. Coffee Connect Coffee Connect is part of your peer-mentoring community. It gives you the opportunity to meet informally with other Fellows in the Network on a one-to-one basis for peer-to-peer mentoring. How to Choose and Recruit a Mentor Our self-service online toolkit supports you to find and recruit a mentor as and when you want. Mentoring Welcome Workshops Book your place on a Welcome Workshop to take part in our Leadership Mentoring Programme. The Mentoring Team Charlotte Bonner-Evans, Mentoring Consultant Charlotte (Corcoran) Bonner-Evans | LinkedIn With a background in counselling and higher education leadership and management, Charlotte is a specialist in mentoring programme development, being passionate about empowering others through mentoring and training, as a practicing ILM Mentor and Coach. Charlotte is the mentoring consultant for the UKRI Future Leaders Fellows Development Network and supports the development of mentoring programmes in HEI to improve individuals’ experiences. As a certified people and project manager, Charlotte aligns project management and people development to support culture change in HEI, being dedicated to fostering a supportive and growth-oriented environment to make a meaningful impact. Charlotte is the InFrame Project Manager, a Wellcome Trust-funded collaborative project at the Universities of Glasgow, Edinburgh, and St. Andrews. Recognising that a skilled collegial approach to leadership is critical for the development of supportive and equitable cultures, the project aims to create a new framework for inclusive collegial research leadership and expand the definition of research leadership. Dr Kay Guccione, Mentoring Programme Architect Dr Kay Guccione (@kayguccione) is Head of Research Culture and Researcher Development at the University of Glasgow and an experienced mentoring consultant. She specialises in mentoring for academic leadership and research career development and is a Masters qualified accredited coach and mentor, and a National Teaching Fellow. Kay designed our award winning, multi-stream mentoring strategy