ID: 97
Title: Recognising Authors (CRediT)
URL: http://eprints.gla.ac.uk/201273/1/201273.pdf
Detected type: pdf
Extraction method: pymupdf
Text length: 6756
----------------------------------------

/glasgowuniversity @UofGlasgow @UofGlasgow UofGlasgow Search: University of Glasgow CRediT | Recognising author contributions to publications Tanita Casci Head of Research Policy Valerie McCutcheon Research Information Manager @tanitacasci @mccutchv FORCE2019 Edinburgh 17 October 2019 Research culture: Promoting how research is done “A positive research culture is one in which colleagues are recognised and valued for their varied contributions to a research activity, in which colleagues support each other to succeed, and in which there is support to produce work that meets the highest standards of academic rigour.” INSPIRING PEOPLE CHANGING THE WORLD University Strategy 2015–2020 Drivers Aim: To recognise and record the distinct roles that each collaborator makes to an output Why? > To improve research practice Avoid disputes, allegations, credit-hogging > To improve research quality With credit comes accountability; with transparency comes quality > To support careers Especially useful for multi-author papers, for ECRs > To future-proof scholarly communications Authorship contributions Authorship doesn’t always reflect contribution … www.casrai.org/credit.html Term Definition Conceptualization Ideas; formulation or evolution of overarching research goals and aims. Methodology Development or design of methodology; creation of models. Software Programming, software development; designing computer programs; implementation of the computer code and supporting algorithms; testing of existing code components. Validation Verification, whether as a part of the activity or separate, of the overall replication/reproducibility of results/experiments and other research outputs. Formal Analysis Application of statistical, mathematical, computational, or other formal techniques to analyse or synthesize study data. Investigation Conducting a research and investigation process, specifically performing the experiments, or data/evidence collection. Resources Provision of study materials, reagents, materials, patients, laboratory samples, animals, instrumentation, computing resources, or other analysis tools. Data Curation Management activities to annotate (produce metadata), scrub data and maintain research data (including software code, where it is necessary for interpreting the data itself) for initial use and later re- use. Writing – Original Draft Preparation, creation and/or presentation of the published work, specifically writing the initial draft (including substantive translation). Writing – Review & Editing Preparation, creation and/or presentation of the published work by those from the original research group, specifically critical review, commentary or revision – including pre- or post-publication stages. Visualization Preparation, creation and/or presentation of the published work, specifically visualization/data presentation. Supervision Oversight and leadership responsibility for the research activity planning and execution, including mentorship external to the core team. Project Administration Management and coordination responsibility for the research activity planning and execution. Funding Acquisition Acquisition of the financial support for the project leading to this publication. 14 CRediT Roles CRediT implemented by growing number of outlets List as of 25/09/19. Visit https://www.casrai.org/credit.html for current list www.gla.ac.uk/media/media_490311_en.pdf November 2017 The CASRAI (Consortia Advancing Standards in Research Administration Information) document may be helpful in articulating contributions: http://dictionary.casrai.org/Contributor_Roles Strategic recruitment schemes www.gla.ac.uk/research/lkas/lkasfellowships/leadershipfellowships/#/howtoapply A Glasgow paper A Glasgow paper…with roles Another Glasgow paper Wellcome’s Open Research platform Adding Roles on Wellcome’s Open Research Platform https://wellcomeopenresearch.org/for-authors/publish-your-research Adding Roles on Glasgow’s Outputs Repository, Enlighten 1. When the publisher implements CRediT https://eprints.gla.ac.uk/182540 Adding Roles on Glasgow’s Outputs Repository, Enlighten 2. When the publisher does not implement CRediT Approach to implementation at UofG • Lead Glasgow author responsible for capturing agreed roles of Glasgow authors • Must choose from the CRediT options • Allow ALL co-authors to review and confirm the roles • Ensure information is provided to publisher • If publisher does not request roles, include them in the narrative if possible • If publisher does not include in paper, submit to research- enlighten@glasgow.ac.uk to have roles recorded on repository What next for CRediT? • Update definitions so that applicable to all disciplines e.g. who curated an exhibition • Look at other output types • Some organisations have added an extra bit of metadata – lead, share, assist in the role. Other roles e.g. technicians, data creators. • Community manager (a possibility?) • In discussion with Crossref and DataCite What next for us? • Repositories might receive the data automatically from publishers • Work with researchers, publishers, suppliers, and others to address requirements • Feedback to CASRAI on usage and maintenance of roles taxonomy • Can this help with Research Excellence Framework author contribution statement? REF2021 Audit Guidance Clause 99b “b. Co-authorship. Details of an individual’s contribution to a co-authored output may be requested, to verify their substantial research contribution. We expect HEIs to be able to identify the most appropriate evidence to verify the author’s contribution. Where this cannot be verified the output will be graded as ‘unclassified’. […] For outputs returned in submissions that are within Main Panels A and B, where the author contribution has been included in the output acknowledgements, this will take precedence over the statement on co-authored outputs.” https://www.ref.ac.uk/publications/audit-guidance-201904/ Find out more about CRediT • Update article in Learned Publishing (2019) https://doi.org/10.1002/leap.1210 • Visit the website: https://casrai.org/credit • Ask a colleague from an adopter organisation • Join the interest group by contacting CASRAI: info@casrai.org Who did what Name/Affiliation Roles Valerie McCutcheon University of Glasgow Conceptualisation, resources, visualisation, writing – original draft Tanita Casci University of Glasgow Resources, visualisation, writing – reviewing and editing Liz Allen f1000 Resources, visualisation Simon Kerridge University of Kent Resources, visualisation Alison McGonagle Co-chair of CRediT Program Committee Resources, visualisation David Baker eVision Resources, visualisation The CASRAI UK Steering Group and Community Resources, validation